URL: https://www.judsonsmartliving.org/blog/top-10-health-benefits-of-massage-therapy-for-seniors/
Content: Home > News & Events > Top 10 Health Benefits of Massage Therapy for Seniors
“It has been verified through scientific exploration that more than 80 percent
of all diseases are due to stress and strain that originate in the mind and
reflect on the body.” We are experiencing more physical, chemical and
emotional stress in our lives than ever before. But the good news is that even
if you’re not aware of these stressors on your mind and body, there are
numerous ways to mitigate their effects. But first, let’s take a second to
define stress to learn how we can get rid of it. “Everybody experiences
stress,” says Sara Peckham, former long-time director of wellness at Judson
and member of Judson’s board of directors. “It’s the body’s natural reaction
to a stimulus or stressor that disturbs our physical or mental equilibrium.
It’s also commonly known as our ‘fight or flight’ response.” This response to
life or death situations served us well in the evolutionary process, allowing
us to adapt and survive in dangerous situations. Here is your body’s
physiological response to this type of stress: You can see how these reactions
can be beneficial in dangerous situations. Our body, in remarkable fashion,
responds so that the necessary functions for immediate survival are enhanced.
Pretty impressive, really. But once the dangerous situation subsided, our body
was meant to return to homeostasis. The problem we’re finding in today’s
culture is that many of us have this “fight or flight” mechanism turned on
continually throughout our lives, and in everyday situations that don’t
warrant this level of response. Refer once again to the list above, and
imagine those reactions being someone’s state of being. Exposed to this type
of stress continually over the course of our lives has a chronic effect and
can lead to the sub-par performance and breakdown of various internal organs,
all the way down to a cellular level. Researchers have identified common
health problems associated with chronic stress: As you can see, these are
issues that don’t affect only older adults, but the members of every
generation. And while we’ve previously offered a variety of avenues to stress
prevention, what do we do if we’ve already experienced the negative effects of
stress? How do we undo the damage stress has wreaked on our body? A great
place to start is massage therapy. Beyond the obvious aesthetic benefits like
relaxation, therapeutic massage has been shown to decrease stress in the body
and lessen the negative effects of anxiety, depression and even digestive
disorders. The Mayo Clinic agrees: “Studies of the benefits of massage
demonstrate that it is an effective treatment for reducing stress, pain and
muscle tension.” “The benefits of massage therapy are wide ranging,” says
Anthony Lima, licensed massage therapist at Judson. “From increasing blood
flow to the limbs to supporting the body’s immune and nervous systems, massage
is a versatile therapy.” Lima has specialized in geriatric massage for the
past five years, and while the healing medium can serve all ages, he finds it
especially helpful for older generations. From stroke recovery to improving
balance, the benefits of massage therapy for seniors are seemingly boundless.
But because our articles can’t be boundless, we’ve condensed the primary
benefits into a very bounded list of ten. Coupling massage therapy with other
relaxing and preventative measures helps to enhance its positive effects.
Activities like Tai Chi, craniosacral therapy and meditation can all help to
decrease the negative effects of stress on the body. Lima also works closely
with occupational and physical therapists for many of his patients, further
enhancing the benefits of this healing medium. “Each time I apply pressure, I
push all your blood through your heart so it’s filtered. It’s almost like
getting an oil change,” he says, laughing. At Judson, we offer massage therapy
at all three of our retirement communities. Judson 2181 Ambleside Drive
Cleveland, Ohio 44106 © Copyright 2024 Judson Services, Inc. Judson Smart
Living® is a registered trademark Privacy Policy Sitemap

URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/geriatric-massage
Content: Geriatric massage is used in older adults. It takes into account the many
factors that influence an aging body, including one’s overall health status,
medical conditions, and medication use. In this article, we explore how
geriatric massage may benefit you or a loved one. And we provide tips for how
to find a certified geriatric massage therapist near you. Massages are a type
of complementary or alternative therapy. They’re not considered part of
conventional medicine, but they may be an additional type of intervention that
helps manage your health symptoms. Geriatric massage is specifically geared
toward a person of advanced age. Older people have special considerations to
keep in mind when getting a massage. A massage therapist will consider all the
factors of aging along with a person’s specific health conditions when
tailoring the massage. Keep in mind that there’s not a one-size-fits-all
approach to geriatric massage. Everyone is different with unique health
conditions and overall fitness. There are many reasons geriatric massage may
be beneficial for you or a loved one. Many older adults lack positive physical
contact with others on a regular basis. A massage therapist can fulfill this
need for you or a loved one with the touch a massage provides. Other overall
benefits to geriatric massage can include: There’s been a lot of research
studying the benefits of geriatric massage. Here are a few notable studies: A
massage therapist will consider several factors for people of advanced age to
ensure their experience is safe and beneficial. A massage therapist will first
consider your overall health when providing a geriatric massage. This may
involve observing your movements along with asking questions about your health
status and activity level. Keep in mind that the aging body encounters changes
to systems in the body. Your body may be more sensitive to pressure, your
joints may work differently, and your muscles and bones may be more
vulnerable. It’s important to let your massage therapist know about any health
conditions you may have prior to your massage. These can include chronic
conditions like arthritis, cancer, circulatory conditions, diabetes,
gastrointestinal conditions, or heart conditions. This is especially important
if you’re advocating for a loved one with dementia or Alzheimer’s disease. A
massage therapist should be aware of all health conditions before performing
the massage. If you take one or several medications to treat health
conditions, let your massage therapist know. They can modify the massage based
on the effects of the medications. As you age, the thickness and durability of
your skin changes. The massage therapist will determine how much pressure they
can apply safely to your skin. Too much pressure could result in breaking or
irritating your skin. You may experience pain differently as an older adult
due to reduced blood flow, a health condition, or medication. Tell your
massage therapist if you have an increased sensitivity to pain or if you’re
unable to feel pain until it’s extreme. This can avoid injury or discomfort.
You may become more sensitive to heat or cold as you age. It may also be
difficult for you to regulate your temperature. Make sure to mention any
sensitivity to temperature to your massage therapist so they can accommodate
you. Finding the right massage therapist for a geriatric massage is key to
having a positive, beneficial experience. Here are some ways you can find a
qualified geriatric massage therapist: Most states require massage therapists
to be licensed. Confirm the massage therapist’s credentials before getting a
massage. Massage therapy is considered an alternative or complementary therapy
by Medicare parts A and B. Therefore, it’s not covered and will require out-
of-pocket payments. Medicare part C may include some provisions for massage
therapy, but you will need to check your individual plan. The cost of a
geriatric massage can range from $50 to $90 for a 1-hour massage. Geriatric
massage can help improve your mood, stress levels, pain, and more. As you age,
your body requires different care, and a massage therapist will factor in your
health needs prior to your massage. A geriatric massage may be shorter than a
typical massage and use special manipulations specific to your health history
and current needs. Massage therapy is not covered by Medicare parts A and B,
so you’ll likely need to pay out of pocket for these services. Share this
article Massage therapy can help relieve physical aches and pains and improve
your mood. Learn more about its potential benefits for treating depression. A
hand massage has benefits for arthritis, carpal tunnel, neuropathy, and pain.
Massaging your hands, or having a massage therapist do it, can boost… Swedish
massage is the most common massage therapy in the U.S. This technique targets
muscles to promote relaxation and possible short-term pain… Portable massage
chairs are lightweight and easy to set up. We’ve rounded up the ones that
create the best experience for clients and massage… There are many types of
back massagers that can help provide targeted relief to areas like your
shoulders or low back. Here are the best back… If living with pain or
discomfort became part of your new normal during the lockdown, try one of
these 13 at-home massage tools for relief. Here is what to know about the best
heated massage pads on the market, and why we recommend them. Cognitive
behavioral therapy is one of the most well-studied types of therapy. We’ll go
over how it works and what to do if you’re interested in… OUR BRANDS

URL: https://www.burleighcentralphysio.com.au/blog/how-the-elderly-can-benefit-from-regular-massage-therapy/
Content: Aged care is a very broad, wide-ranging subject. Often, people think about
aged care as simply looking after the elderly’s daily needs, but it’s much
more than that. It’s all about helping the elderly maintain a high quality of
life, and movement is a big part of that. With better movement and mobility,
elderly people can experience more independence and lead a more active
lifestyle. As Burleigh massage specialists, we know the importance of massage
for elderly patients. The benefits are significant, along with many other
forms of physiotherapy. Today though, we’re going to focus on massage as a way
to help elderly patients maintain mobility for longer and live without pain.
Massage therapy is an effective form of soft tissue therapy used for a whole
range of conditions. In basic terms, massage therapy involves holding, moving,
and applying pressure to the muscles, tendons, ligaments and fascia. The
benefits are profound, and extremely wide-reaching. People use massage therapy
as a regular means of treating muscle soreness. It’s also useful in promoting
good mobility and flexibility while avoiding injuries. In fact, most
physiotherapy rehabilitation plans will include massage as part of the
treatment. There are several different types of massage, such as sports,
remedial and deep tissue. Your physiotherapist will recommend the right style
for you. In the case of promoting elderly mobility, massage should only be
performed by professionals who are skilled in aged care massage. As we age,
its natural that things don’t work quite as well as they used to. But that
doesn’t mean you need to confine yourself to a life free of movement and
independence. It’s a natural occurrence for joints and muscles to degrade over
time, but regular massage can help delay the process. There are several age-
related conditions that start appearing as we get older, such as: Many of
these conditions can be treated with elderly massage. And while your
physiotherapist can’t give you back the joints and muscles of a 20-year-old,
they can certainly help to improve your movement. Ultimately, this means you
can be more active for longer, and have a better quality of life with less
pain. Elderly people can benefit from massage much in the same way that
anybody else can. Whether you’re recovering from surgery or suffering from
chronic muscle pain, massage is a great treatment option. The concepts behind
using massage as a treatment are the same no matter your age, however elderly
massage requires specific knowledge about how the body works differently as we
age. This is why you should only trust an expert physiotherapist for Burleigh
massage services. Here are some of the many ways elderly people can benefit
from massage. As the body ages, joints tend to stiffen, muscles don’t
cooperate the way we want them to, and movement becomes more difficult. In
some instances, movement can be painful. In others, you may not experience
pain but your range of motion is still limited. As we know, mobility and
flexibility are important for maintaining a healthy lifestyle. If you’re
unable to walk or move around without pain, you’re less likely to get the
exercise you need to stay healthy. This can lead to a range of circulatory
system problems and other medical conditions. Massage helps reduce muscle
tension and increase your range of movement. Massage has long been known to
improve circulation. This is especially true around problem areas, such as
surgery or injury sites. All types of massage improve blood circulation which
is great for injury recovery. With increased blood flow around injury sites,
there’s more oxygen going to the area which is crucial for recovery. As we get
older, circulation becomes even more important, especially when recovering
from injuries or surgery. With massage being so effective in improving
circulation, elderly patients can benefit greatly. Better circulation is also
great for pain relief, so it’s a win-win. Aches and pains are fairly common as
we age, but some muscle soreness is worse than others. Many elderly patients
suffer from chronic pain in their back or around joints. This limits movement
and prevents them from doing things we take for granted when we’re younger. As
we mentioned before, pain can stop people from living an active lifestyle
which often results in other medical complications. Massage is so effective
for pain relief because the benefits are instant but also long-lasting.
Specific areas of soreness can be targeted for instant pain relief, which not
only makes you more comfortable but allows you to do more. In addition,
regular massage keeps pain levels low because of the increased circulation and
reduction in muscle stiffness. Overall, pain relief is one of the most
important benefits of massage therapy for seniors. There’s an increased focus
on mental health and well-being these days, and the elderly certainly aren’t
immune. Unlike other stages of life, elderly patients aren’t always able to do
the things suggested to younger people to combat mental health issues.
Exercise is more difficult, for one thing. However, massage can give elderly
patients the mobility and flexibility to be more active. This has an almost
instant effect on their mental health. In addition, living with pain is a huge
contributor to mental health issues. So, it stands to reason that massage
therapy can reduce pain and therefore increase the sense of well-being in
older patients. Physiotherapists with experience in elderly massage are the
best people to consult with. With older bodies, it’s important that massage
therapists take care and consideration. While massage is considered a
generally safe practice, there are undoubtedly risks associated with working
on elderly patients. So, if you’re looking for Burleigh massage services for
the elderly, ensure you make an appointment with a trusted professional. Your
email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment *
Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for
the next time I comment.

URL: https://raleighoaksbh.com/the-many-health-benefits-of-massage-for-seniors/
Content: As an acute inpatient psychiatric hospital, Raleigh Oaks’s trauma-informed
care and evidence-based practices address a wide variety of mental health
conditions allowing for better outcomes. Here you will find answers to some
frequently asked questions from patients and family members and get to know
more about our services. An organization is only as good as its people. And
we’ve got some great people. Come and meet them and see why Raleigh Oaks
Behavioral Health is truly unique. We are easy to find just outside the
greater Raleigh NC area. Raleigh Oaks is here for anyone dealing with
psychiatric symptoms or a mental health crisis in Garner, NC, and the
surrounding communities. Our inpatient program offers effective treatment for
patients experiencing acute behavioral health issues, often in the form of a
crisis requiring short-term hospitalization. Our outpatient program is
designed for individuals who could benefit from a structured program that
promotes the development of coping skills.. Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health
offers specialized medical treatment to older adults (50+) who are
experiencing mental health and/or behavioral issues that require 24-hour
hospitalization. Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health's services are designed to
provide intensive care for adults who are experiencing severe symptoms of
mental illness or emotional distress. At Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health,
patients can receive effective short-term treatment for the five major types
of anxiety disorders. At Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health, patients go through a
free evaluation. If diagnosed with depression, they may be treated with
medication, therapy, or a combination of both. At Raleigh Oaks Behavioral
Health, we offer professional behavioral treatment for bipolar disorder,
formerly known as manic depression. At Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health,
inpatient care for schizophrenia involves providing intensive treatment and
support for individuals who are experiencing acute symptoms of the disorder
and require a higher level of care than can be provided on an outpatient
basis. At Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health, treating dual diagnosis involves an
integrated and coordinated approach that addresses both the mental health
disorder and the substance use disorder. Anyone can contact us for information
on scheduling an assessment. Assessments are completely confidential, and we
are available 24/7 to assist with questions. Call today. Explore articles and
helpful information covering a wide range of behavioral and psychiatric health
topics. We understand medical bills can be overwhelming, so ask us about
payment plans or possible financial assistance. We want to help you find the
option that best fits your current situation. At Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health, we
want to collaborate with behavioral health providers, medical
providers, first responders, caseworkers and more to provide high-quality
compassionate care in our community. Get the latest information on happenings
at Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health. We are pleased to offer various networking
and/or educational events throughout the year. Please register if you are
interested in attending. When’s the last time you had a massage? Last week?
Five years ago? Never? Therapeutic massage offers a long list of physical and
mental health benefits. It can improve circulation, digestion, flexibility,
sleep, and mood, and it has wonderful benefits for addiction recovery as well.
It’s true that massage can be expensive, usually between $70-100 per hour, but
if you can adjust your budget to fit in a monthly massage, it will be worth
the cost–and may save you money on other types of healthcare. If you’re a
senior adult or caring for a senior, you might be surprised to learn that
massage can be an especially effective treatment for a variety of age-related
health concerns. Let’s look more closely at how massage therapy can benefit
older adults. Massage has many benefits for senior adults. Healthline lists
several research studies that demonstrate the following: According to American
Senior Communities, massage has the following benefits as well: Massage
therapists who work with older clients know how to adjust their approach to
fit the aging body’s needs. They may adjust the length of the session as well
as where it happens and the techniques they use. Massage for elderly clients
who are ill may take place in their own bed, chair, or wheelchair. From one
therapist who specializes in geriatric massage: “‘You keep your goals very
moderate,’ says Jane Neumann, LMT, who specializes in treating older people
with Parkinson’s disease (PD) or dementia. ‘You’re not curing their condition.
You’re there to be present and to touch them with kindness. It is very moving
work.’” Looking at a massage “menu” may feel a bit overwhelming. There are
many varieties of massage, and some of them may sound a little on the painful
side (hot stone, deep tissue, shiatsu). How do you know what kind of massage
will feel best and give you the most benefit? The first step is to talk with
your doctor and ask whether massage will be helpful for you. In rare cases, you
may need to approach massage with caution, depending on certain health
concerns. Your doctor will know what to recommend and may even be able to
refer you to a particular therapist. Then, focus on finding a massage
therapist you like. Ask for recommendations from friends. Read reviews. Try
more than one therapist. Each therapist has their own style and their own way
of interacting with clients. Find someone you like, who asks for feedback and
listens to you. When you go to your appointment, explain any physical concerns
you have–areas of tenderness, old or new injuries, etc. If at any time during
the massage you feel discomfort or pain, speak up. Massage therapists can
provide a wide range of pressure, and each client has different preferences
for how “deep” they want the pressure to be. It’s perfectly appropriate for
you to tell your therapist what you like. Removing clothing: While it’s true
that many people remove most or all of their clothing for a massage, it’s fine
to wear comfortable clothing. In fact, some types of massage (Thai, Shiatsu)
are designed to be given when clients are fully clothed. Reflexology, sports
massage, deep-tissue massage, craniosacral therapy, and more can all be done
with clothing on. (Note: if you decide to remove your clothing, rest assured
that your therapist will ensure full coverage of private areas at all times.)
Getting hurt: As mentioned above, if your massage therapist uses too much
pressure, ask them to go more gently. You may feel sore after a massage, the
same as you might feel after a vigorous workout, but that will fade after a
few days. Drinking water after massages will help rehydrate the muscles.
Everyone has body parts they don’t like or that smell funny or make weird
noises. Massage therapists have seen it all, and you will soon learn that it’s
not a big deal. Massage can do wonders for your health, but it can’t solve
everything. If you or a loved one are struggling with mental or behavioral
health concerns, seek professional treatment geared toward diagnosis,
stabilization, and whole-person care. At Raleigh Oaks in Garner, NC, we
specialize in working with adults and senior adults, providing therapy,
medication management, and a sustainable discharge plan to help patients get
back to a fuller and less restrictive environment. Contact us today to learn
more. About programs offered at Raleigh Oaks Behavioral Health NO-COST,
CONFIDENTIAL ASSESSMENTSwith Mental Health Professionals are available 24/7.
3200 Waterfield Dr. Garner, NC 27529 Facility Phone: (888) 603-0020 Follow Us:
Admissions help Line: (888) 603-0020 3200 Waterfield Dr. Garner, NC 27529

